Three Mornings Near Three Rivers

Picture your stereotypical coffeehouse hipster – flat bill hat, probably from some small brand you have never heard of, man bun, beard, moleskin notebook. He is me. I am him. But I swear I am only half as insufferable and a quarter as pretentious as my spiritual compatriots…probably. More than anything, I’m in that sort of zillennial demographic where flash vacations and home ownership are probably long out of reach. And thus, this clueless southerner vacations in Pittsburgh, splurging on that most quintessential of simple joys: coffee. I drink the stuff like my life depends on it. Hell, I got the logo for my local coffee joint tattooed for the promise of free drip coffee for life – an offer the owner is almost certainly now regretting. So when the opportunity presented itself to try a different cafe every morning of my short trip to the Steel City, well let’s just say I wasn’t disappointed. 

Likewise, the promise of rain never failed to muster. I have heard tale of Pittsburgh’s notoriously gray skies, but was never quite so sure it could be true. Oh, the fool I was. The morning of day one was cool, overcast, and spitting just enough rain to make life outside miserable. The silver lining, if you will pardon the pun, is that rainy days, empirically, make for the best coffee consumption. Truly, nothing can be more pleasant than a gentle rain, a warm cup of dirty chai, and nowhere to be. Throw a pair of top notch breakfast burritos on top, and, whew you can lay me down for the long sleep! Such was the start of my morning at the Kinder Being – a quiet shop tucked inside the Government Records (of the spinning, not literary, variety I assure you) Building. You ever just walk into a place that instantly clicks with your vibe?

From what little you know about me, you can probably guess the rainbow flags waived any sense of trepidation I might have had. And Greg, the barista and sole proprietor, truly lived up to the name of his shop – salt of the earth type people you know? It’s one of my favorite things, interacting with genuine people who give a damn about what they are doing.  It's something so glaringly absent in the corporatized coffee world that seems, now, ubiquitous. So to encounter kindness in such spades is restorative in ways I struggle to fully convey. Where else is the owner going to swing by your table, recommend some cool places to see while in the city, and offer a few drinks they think you might like? It sure as hell isn’t Starbucks, I can tell you that. What’s more, I can say the cold brew and cortado were just as good as promised. 

And so the bar for day two was set, almost unfairly, high. Cafe 412, though, never got that memo. Largely because I don’t think they have ever cared too much about the world beyond their corner shop. I had been warned of the “Northern Attitude”, a sort of no-nonsense, get in - get out, shut up and order type of thing. Coming from the South, the land of slow drawls and hour long goodbyes, it was almost jarring to come across something so pleasantly real. You see, southern hospitality, at least so far as I have encountered, is often all an act – a public display of decency coupled with much behind the curtain grumbling. This was a foreign concept to the good folks at 412. The chalkboard menu is a mix of classic Italian espresso drinks and paninis. The older couple who run the place move in a sort of concert that can only be described as beautifully habitual. This isn’t their first day in the shop. 

Nor is it the first day for many of the customers. I lost track of the number of regulars who came and went during our breakfast – all of them wished well by name. By the time the group of iron workers rolled in I had fairly well established this was very much a locals place in the best of ways. Am I writing home about the coffee? Probably not – a good, classic cappuccino, don’t get me wrong. But my sandwich on the other hand, piled high with meats and cheeses, well now that is owed its due peace. It was the sort of thing that helped recontextualize the humble sandwich in my sheltered southern brain. You see, the South doesn’t really understand what a deli is. If you are lucky there is a Jersey Mike’s in town, otherwise it's Subway cardboard or nothing. In Pittsburgh, I found, they take their sandwiches seriously. This was the start of that journey, while Primanti Bros. was the logical conclusion. But that is a story for a different time. 

Right now, it is critical that I stay focused and hone in on the morning of my last day in the ‘Burgh. A brisk morning at that – spent at the last available street side table at Georgies Corner. Whereas the last couple shops had been generally quiet, with a steady trickle of patrons, Georgies, well Georgies was a different animal. Their royal blue storefront was packed to the gills – not a seat in the place and a line headed nearly out the door. And I tell you this now, there are few better signs for the quality of the meal you are about to have than business men in full suits waiting in line. When impatient people are willing to wait, now that is about as good as a Michelin star for my money. 

And oh how wonderfully, intoxicatingly right I was. Up to this point I have done my best to spare you the truly insufferable coffee nerdom. Chances are you don’t care too much for tasting notes, or single origin, or anything beyond “was it a good cup of joe?” But here, at Georgies, my moral compass obligates me to tell you that my cortado was transcendent. For those uninitiated, the cortado is a classic espresso drink consisting of equal parts steamed milk and espresso. Short of a straight shot, it is about the most uncomplicated milk drink you can order. There is nothing to hide behind – no syrups to cover acidic underextraction, and just enough milk to temper bitterness but not enough to drown it out completely. It is my litmus test for if a place takes their coffee seriously. Now when I say this was the deepest, most complex coffee I may have ever had the joy of tasting, I need you to know I say that with the full recognition that my word may never be taken seriously again. However, the perfect balance of acidity and bitterness complemented by a gentle, natural sweetness carried itself on almost fruity, chocolaty notes down the long finish, damn nearly broke me. Oat milk (you aren’t surprised I’m sure) steamed, not foamed, to velvety perfection created a flawless texture. And I could go on but it gets decidedly less safe for work from here on.  

The kale hash bowl, cinnamon roll, and corn cookie I had to accompany it were all excellent. All, frankly, worth the visit in their own right. But that cortado. That damn cortado. Ruinous as it is, will live rent free in the back of my brain for years to come. I find there is a certain kind of excitement to that – a certain thrill to the chase. When you encounter a drink or a dish so good that it changes your very definition of excellence, that is a wonderful and rare thing. Not only does it become the yardstick by which new experiences are compared, but it becomes a sort of pseudo-romantic ideal. 

It is the sort of near mythical moment that one can chase well on into the future. It is just the type of thing that makes me fall in love with a city. It’s not just the coffee. It’s the lovely, everyday people at neighboring tables. All of them talking about unions and pensions, of their adorable young kids, and their hopes for their time at U Pitt. It all marries in this impossible vibrancy set against the backdrop of what can only be described as a perfect breakfast. It is the sort of everyday joy I find myself chasing all the more often now. It’s simple, unadulterated. It’s just the sort of thing this hopeless romantic hipster hoped to stumble into on his cut-price vacation. 



I spent much of the rest of my time in Pittsburgh simply wandering the streets. Walkability, let alone fantastic architecture, is a rather new concept for me, and I saw fit to make the most of it during my visit. What struck me most about the city was its coherent, unabashed honesty. It's a place with a long history – a history that shows in the eyes of the people and in the flavors of the food and drinks. There is something spectacular about the sheer quantity of mom and pop eateries that dot the city streets. Nestled between two hundred year old homes, museums, and conservatories, Pittsburgh’s coffee culture is superficially unassuming, but roiling with community and kindness just below the surface. 
  
