I will find myself in an airport, for instance, and I’ll order an airport hamburger. It’s an insignificant thing, it’s a small thing, it’s a hamburger, but it’s not a good one. Suddenly I look at the hamburger and I find myself in a spiral of depression that can last for days. -Anthony Bourdain

What’s a boring, cis, white man with major depressive order to do? 

And before you click away, I swear this isn’t a self pity article or some insufferable deep dive on the male loneliness epidemic. At least, that’s not the intention – for today at least. More than anything I need to process through what I am going to call Bad Burger Syndrome. I remember first hearing the above quote from Bourdain somewhere around five years ago. I think, like a lot of people, I tied that into his usual self-deprecating rhetoric and thought nothing more of it. And such as we were, fools the lot of us – depriving ourselves of any greater reckoning despite the literal underlying tonality of the show grappling specifically with the spiny realities of the world around us. 

And then I had a Bad Burger. 

It took half a decade from the introduction of the concept and turned out to be a rack of ribs. Let me set the scene for you. It’s a Friday night. You are, per usual, shattered from a week of working like the dog you are, all the while complaining about your capitalist overlords as you enable their very existence; willingly or otherwise. Home late, the kitchen is a fucking wreck, and even if it were spotless the lone door full of condiments promises little in the way of sustenance. So what do you do? You order doordash like the absolutely worthless sack of rotten potatoes you are. And really what could be better? Mediocre food with a side of beat-yourself-up for being but another cog. 

And so you get the ribs. Who doesn’t like ribs? And it’s a Friday night, perhaps a little celebration (read: desperate search for dopamine crumbs) is in order. You will never be rich enough to buy a house, but you can, more or less, splurge on the occasional good meal. Except it’s not a good meal. The lukewarmness can be fixed. The fact that it is so impossibly dry and rock hard cannot. And it is so utterly soulcrushing I can suddenly hear the echo of Bourdain’s gravely tones in the back of my furiously frustrated skull. It was the juxtaposition. I swear. 

The desperate attempt to take care of oneself, overlaid with this inedible harbinger of depressive oppression, quite literally, brought me to tears. And thus ribs are a bad hamburger, and life is suddenly no longer worth living. Normally we stay above the board on that one, but sometimes, well, these things can’t be helped. It, so quickly, snowballs into something bigger than it was ever meant to be. Suddenly the Bad Burger is your failure to provide for yourself, your contribution to a predatory food delivery service, and an act of supporting the demise of small family businesses by eating Darden. 

It’s a fun game, really, seeing just how many things you can make your fault. How many ways can you give in to the lifetime of indoctrination? Off and along the doom spiral goes, where will it stop? Nobody knows! What’s even better is that I’m not one of the world’s most successful travel show hosts, generally beloved the world over. The only reviews I have to look back on are of the performance variety and contain only reminders of how unsatisfactory my best efforts are seen by my supervisors. Somehow they fail to offer the kind of reassurance I had been so seeking. 

But at this point I am dangerously near, if not having crossed over into, the land of the pity party. Allow me, then, to redirect to a sort of space between, the precipice, if you will. It has been my observation that several generations now exist, at all times, on the razor’s edge. It’s … well, it's this dumb meme:



It’s the realization that just about every generation starting with the millennials on down have come to reckon with – those of us too busy with elementary school to buy foreclosures in 2008. We are all, empirically speaking, fucked. 

When the mere proposition of owning a home or even entertaining the idea of having children becomes a pipe dream, you find yourself an entire generation of nightmarers – the dreamers have now been long displaced. The future [peoples] of the world, quite literally, condemned and resigned to their fates. This is our third “once-in-a-lifetime” economic collapse (likely soon to be our fourth if AI has anything to say about it), first pandemic, and nearly fifteen hundredth school shooting. Every bit of economic advice we were given as children: study hard, get a degree, buy a house, play the rat race, and so on, all of it was a lie. Well intentioned or otherwise, we were, as a cohort, promised the world and given the scraps. 

And so the Bad Burger becomes nearly as dangerous as unexpected hospital bills, nearly. A symbolic death, the poor person’s hemlock if you will. When one struggles to come to terms with the unfortunate reality of the era they live in, there becomes an unhealthy dependency on the smallest of crutches. Or perhaps the word isn’t quite a crutch so much as it is increasingly rare solace. What do you do when your entire world is supported on a foundation of processed meat and toxic preservatives all wrapped in the guise of nutrition? And even worse, what if it doesn’t even taste good? If it tastes like cough syrup, but lacks the medicine, well is that not just poison?

And here, dear reader, is where my little rant breaks down. My impotent rage has spilled over for more than you have probably cared to read at this point, all without the answers you were promised. Unfortunately for you, this article was provided sans warranty, real or implied. And so I will leave you the only bit of solace I can. 

If any of the above ramblings resonated with you, well, you are at least slightly less alone in the world today. 
