A Futile Exercise In Existentialism
Matt Trn

It has been some long time since I cracked open my copy of Fahrenheit 451. Its acid-yellowed pages have found themselves a constant companion of my bookshelves for well over a decade now – since my first and only reading sometime back in high school. At the time the story was really rather lost on me. If only slightly less hamfisted in its metaphor than Orwell’s allegorical Animal Farm, it nonetheless was well beyond the comprehension of my teenage angst. Some Sparks Noting later, and an evening cramming out what I had assumed the teacher wanted to hear, I closed the book and thought little of it in the intervening years. 

That was until an all-hands meeting sometime in early 2025. Coffee clutched to my chest, and not the least bit of enthusiasm in my eyes, I sat at a back table. I half listened as I worked through my planner for the day. These sort of meetings always seemed to cater to the faculty, especially as a means of celebrating their wondrous achievements, all the while requiring the staff to languish in the darkened corners, quietly clapping when queued. So when presenterman stood up to talk about the new student assistance system I kept right along working out my week in ink. Until he stopped and posed to the crowd “So where do you all think they got the name for Element 451?” And something there caused the creaking gears in the back of my yet uncaffeinated brain to spin freely. 

I was in the process of raising my hand when an instructor beat me to it. In a voice distinctly apprehensive she answered “Um, is it supposed to be a reference to Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451?” Presenterman beamed with approval and went on to congratulate her for knowing the answer so quickly. What was distinctly lost to him was the disquieting tone with which she had answered. He rambled on in his explanation, but the justification roughly boiled down to Fahrenheit 451 is a story about burning books, and this new program is intended to computerize the process of tracking student success. Ergo, Fahrenheit 451 is an excellent analogy for the process of digitalization. Now literature lovers the world over might take some great pause with this reasoning, not just for being a trite coopting of a classic title, but for having, in new and impressive ways, missed the entire point of the text. 

But student success isn’t my job. In fact, any suggestions I have ever made toward improving student lab experience have been, by and large, ignored or belittled. It is thus that I have learned my lesson about meddling in the world beyond my lane. This reality surely allowed me to hold my tongue in the moment, but that is not to say that it prevented the sheer idiocy of the idea from living rent free in the annals of my decrepit mind – playing on regular repeat. At least once a week, a chorus of “Surely I must have missed something.” or “Presenterman must have just been mistaken and ran with the first answer he got.” 

That was up until another all-hands meeting in early January 2026. This one, some nearly perfect reverberation of the last, came with an update on the Element 451 system now that it was actually in place – right on the heels of a presentation about the detriment of AI to our institution and students. Like clockwork, up I peered from my planning session, as if commanded by some greater power to bear witness to the madness about to unfold. If not for my social anxiety, I would have whipped my phone out on the spot to take a picture of their presentation. You see, there are images that look AI generated, and then there is this picture of a humanoid looking at a computer monitor. Instead of looking at the screen it had the monitor rotated 90 degrees and was staring intently at the bezeled edge, typing on what was ostensibly a keyboard, though it was difficult to be sure, with the whole mess plugged directly into the side of a rough approximation of a classic school desk. The irony, especially given the previous presentation about the dangers of AI, was palpable. 

Many of the others seated around my table stifled chuckles when I quietly pointed out the monstrosity of an image. And monstrosity is perhaps an apt term for the greater Element 451 program as a whole. For no sooner had I written this off as a farce than the term “AI powered, but human centered” was uttered by the presenters. As it happens, Element 451 is actually an AI system tied directly into Canvas to keep tabs on students and then send automatic emails and text messages to students should they be in danger of failing a class. It was in that moment that I could feel Bradbury so violently turning in his grave that new types of physics were being learned from his centripetal force alone. 

As soon as the disbelief finished its rippling over my being, I felt a certain sort of anger rising. More than simple outrage at getting the themes of a story incorrect, more even than a heartless attempt to automate away the troubles of our most vulnerable students, it was a fervent hatred at the very fabric of our reality that had allowed for such a timeline to exist. A singularity, if you will, the collapsing of my entire disgust for the modern world into a single point – a symbolic pall bearer for the end of what it means to be human. Carried with it, the erasure of art in all its forms, visual, literary, and beyond, all perverted by humanity’s new great foe, artificial intelligence. 

It is a scene so dystopian that it near exceeds the predictive influence of the work from which it was spawned. I am no literary genius. Nor am I even particularly well read. But, all these years later, I can still remember vague plot points from Bradbury’s seminal work. I can recall the plight of Guy Montag, suddenly coming to a sort of mournful sentience in a world seemingly locked in a downward spiral. Knowledge itself, the universal great equalizer, coming to blows with maleficent powers that would cement their infinite rule over the masses if only they could destroy the hoe that might root out ignorance. It is a picture of a society now all too familiar. Algorithmic manipulation, social engineering, disinformation campaigns, all these things we know are happening continually in our world. But to see it laid so bare, so unabashed and raw, here in my institution, resulted in a reality I was ill equipped to process. 

Some days later and I still find my mind racing over the themes of anti-intellectualism and pre-ordained “thought” that seemed so distant some decades ago. I remain incapable of reconciling this hideous creation of ineptitude and cruelty that is Element 451 with my greater role in the college. How can this, what many see as the last bastion for those born sans silver spoon in mouth, become something so patently unaligned with the goals that informed its very creation? The feeling, for me at least, is somewhere between betrayed and undermined. 

And what sends my own sanity on spiraling down over the edge are the details of the program itself. When pressed, the presenters explained the operation of the system simply as:
“Element 451 looks at the final column in Canvas for total grade. If that grade falls below a 70 it automatically generates a polite email and text message [they were particularly excited about the text messaging feature] to the student letting them know that they are in danger of failing and that there may be resources to assist them in this matter.”

And that’s it. Full access to all our students’ data, and that is all the system can muster for assistance. Big Brother is indeed watching – now through a one way mirror fed directly out the door to some faceless megacorp masquerading as a compassionate professor. No informed consent; arguably intentionally obfuscated. And, at the risk of my sardonicism escaping the realm of the believable, I must confer that the moment was pushed further into the realm of absurdism when the next presenter stood up to introduce our new Internal Review Board and its role in protecting students, their data, and identifiable information. Element 451, then, is a system so laughably shallow it almost demands some sort of nefarious, ulterior motive. 

For comparison, some years ago I built an online ordering system during COVID lockdown to allow NCSSM students to order lunch remotely and pick up their food from a drop location. The functionality was simple: an updated daily menu populates an online form, the student selects their food and submits, the order appears in the kitchen, after completion the kitchen marks it done, and an automated script sends an email to the student letting them know their food is ready and where to get it. That system, coded by a fool in an afternoon, is significantly more complex and robust than what this purported AI system is capable of. And the cost of all this malignant ineptitude? Yours for just $20,000 a year; taxes and fees not included, subject to increase without warning.

It is a strange sort of grief, that feeling of being simultaneously scammed – or really perhaps, even worse, watching someone else be scammed – and betrayed. It is a deeply unpleasant cocktail of emotions to reckon with. And I dare not call any of it out for fear of C-suite retribution, as certainly this must be the product of one of their uncle’s, cousin’s, sister-in-law’s, nephew, twice removed…on their father’s side. It is the simplest answer I can muster, and, somehow, if it isn’t straightforward nepotistic embezzlement it makes me all the more melancholy. That reality would imply a willingness, an intentionality, to ”go gentle into that good night.” 

And thus I have droned on for some 1500 words on the school's dime, incapable of mustering the will to complete any tasks beyond those most essential. I come to that old dilemma of what, really, is the point of it all? I know a fair few of our instructors are using AI to make and grade their assignments. Some have even adopted it for creation of presentations and other instructional materials. Moreover, I now know that the students’ success is being left to an impersonal AI robot with a simple IF statement for a brain. And all the while the students hand in AI written assignments and AI generated images of take home labs they never opened. 

So here I am, audience to an AI teacher conversing with an AI student, all being watched by an AI success coach.

Nothing is gained just as everything is lost.  
